Exercises

Short Answer

1. What is a real-life scenario that uses linear search?

I want to see if I have any 5 dollar bills in my purse. A
linear search would be a good choice since i don't typically 
keep my cash in any type of order. I can iterate through each
bill starting at the beginning until I either reach a 5 
dollar bill or reach the end of the cash. 

2. What is a real-life scenario that uses binary search?

I have an a list of my clients sorted alphabetically by last 
name and I want to search for Stacey Dietz to see when her next
appointment is. Since this is a sorted list doing a binary
search would be the most efficient way.

3. Given the alphabetically sorted collection in this 
checkpoint, how many iterations would it take to find the value 
G using linear search?

7 iterations

4. Given the alphabetically sorted collection in this 
checkpoint, how many iterations would it take to find the value 
G using binary search?

3 iterations

5. Given an unsorted collection of a million items, which 
algorithm would you choose between linear search and binary 
search? Explain your reasoning.

I would choose a linear search due to the fact that the list is
unsorted.

6. Given a sorted collection of a million items, which 
algorithm would you choose between linear search and binary 
search? Explain your reasoning.

I would choose a binary search due to the fact that it is an
extensive list and that it is sorted. This would be the most
efficient choice.

Programming Assignment

1. You and a friend have set a wager to see who can find the 
word "Albatross" in the dictionary the fastest. Write a program 
to allow you to win the bet.

FUNCTION binarySearch(dictionary, word)
 #1
 Set lowerCase to a new variable with all of dictionary's strings lowercased
  FUNCTION dictionary.map
  return dictionary.toLowerCase()
 SET first to FIRST INDEX of dictionary // 0
 SET end to LAST INDEX of dictionary // dictionary.length - 1

 #2
 WHILE first <= end
   #3
   SET mid to (first + end) / 2      // Math.floor((0 + dictionary.length - 1) / 2)
   IF lowerCase[mid] > word THEN  //
     #4
     SET end to mid - 1
   ELSE IF dictionary[mid] < word
     #5
     SET first to mid + 1
   ELSE
     #6
     RETURN mid
   END IF
 END WHILE

 #7
 RETURN NOT FOUND


 function binarySearch(dictionary, word){
   var lowerCase = dictionary.map(function(dictionary){
    return dictionary.toLowerCase();
   });

   let first = 0;
   let end = dictionary.length - 1;

   while (first <= end ){
     let mid = Math.floor((first + end) / 2)
     console.log(first + ' ' + mid + ' ' + end);
     if (lowerCase[mid] > word.toLowerCase()){
       end = mid - 1;
     } else if (lowerCase[mid] < word.toLowerCase()){
       first = mid +1;
     } else {
       return mid
     }
   }
   return "not found";
 }

 console.log(binarySearch(dictionary1, 'Albatross'));

 var dictionary1 = ['a', 'abamp', 'abase', 'abby', 'abgatha', 'abhor',
                   'abhorrent', 'air', 'Albatross', 'bat', 'butter', 'cat', 'cauliflower',
                   'dog', 'fish', 'fishing', 'fry', 'frying', 'gnat', 'hat', 'igloo',
                    'jam', 'kite', 'kitten', 'lake', 'mat', 'nap', 'none', 'nothing',
                    'orange', 'Prince', 'queen', 'rat', 'razor', 'snake', 'silly', 'slack',
                    'take', 'try', 'umbrella', 'vision', 'wake', 'x-ray', 'yak', 'zebra'];


 console.log(binarySearch(dictionary1, 'Albatross'));  // prints 8


2. You work at a pet store, and a child has asked you to net 
the only white-spotted goldfish from the fish tank. Write a 
program that will help you net the right fish.

/* FUNCTION Find White-spotted Goldfish
   FOR each fish in the bowl
     IF fish = target THEN
       RETURN
     END IF
   END FOR

   RETURN NOT FOUND  */

function findWhiteSpot(bowl, target ){
   var result = null, value;
   for(var i = 0; i < bowl.length; i++) {
     value = bowl[i];
     if(value === target){
       result = i;
       break;
     }
   }
   return result;
 };

 let fishbowl = ['goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish',
                'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish',
                'goldfish', 'white-spotted goldfish', 'goldfish',
               'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish',
               'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', 'goldfish', ]

console.log(findWhiteSpot(fishbowl, 'white-spotted goldfish')); //prints 11